# Scalar – Mastering AI Bootcamp
Scalar is a single number.

Example: `x = 6`

Vector
------

Vector is a one-dimensional array of numbers.

Example: `x = [1, 2]` or usually written as

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Multiplication of Scalar and Vector

Vector can be multiplied by a scalar. For example, if we multiply the vector above by 2, written as

\\\[ 2 \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

then the result is

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 2 \\\\ 4 \\\\ 6 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Addition of Scalar and Vector

This operation is not defined. Scalar can’t be added to vector.

### Addition of Vectors

Vectors can be added together

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix} + \\begin{bmatrix} 4 \\\\ 5 \\\\ 6 \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 7 \\\\ 9 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

When the dimension of the vectors are different, the addition is not defined. The following is NOT allowed

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix} + \\begin{bmatrix} 4 \\\\ 5 \\\\ \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Vector dot product

Vector dot product is a way to multiply vectors together. The result is a scalar.

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 4 \\\\ 5 \\\\ 6 \\end{bmatrix} = 1 \\times 4 + 2 \\times 5 + 3 \\times 6 = 32 \\\]

Not:

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 4 \\\\ 5 \\\\ 6 \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \* 4 \\\\ 2 \* 5 \\\\ 3 \* 6 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

Matrix
------

Matrix is a two-dimensional array of numbers. Matrix is usually written as

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 \\\\ 4 & 5 & 6 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Matrix dimension

The dimension of a matrix is the number of `rows` x `columns`. The above matrix has dimension of 2 x 3.

### Relation to Vector

A vector is a matrix with only one column. The following vector is a matrix with dimension of 3 x 1

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Matrix addition

Matrix can be added together if they have the same dimension. For example, the following is allowed

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 \\\\ 4 & 5 & 6 \\end{bmatrix} + \\begin{bmatrix} 7 & 8 & 9 \\\\ 10 & 11 & 12 \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 8 & 10 & 12 \\\\ 14 & 16 & 18 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Matrix dot product

Matrix dot product is defined as follows

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} x\_{00} & x\_{01} \\\\ x\_{10} & x\_{11} \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} y\_{00} \\\\ y\_{10} \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} x\_{00} y\_{00} + x\_{01} y\_{10} \\\\ x\_{10} y\_{00} + x\_{11} y\_{10} \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

For example:

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 6 \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\times 5 + 2 \\times 6 \\\\ 3 \\times 5 + 4 \\times 6 \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 17 \\\\ 39 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

If X dimension is `m` x `n` and Y dimension is `n` x `p`, then the result of X dot Y is `m` x `p`.

So, `m` x `n` dot `o` x `p` is not defined if `n` is not equal to `o`. Example

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 5 & 6 \\\\ 7 & 8 \\\\ 9 & 10 \\end{bmatrix} = undefined \\\]

The order of the dot product is important.

\\\[ A \\cdot B \\neq B \\cdot A \\\]

For example, if we flip the order of the above dot product, we get

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 6 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix} = undefined \\\]

Matrix dot product is associative:

\\\[ A \\cdot (B \\cdot C) = (A \\cdot B) \\cdot C \\\]

### Matrix Transpose

Matrix transpose is a matrix that is flipped over its diagonal. For example, the transpose of the following matrix is

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix}^T = \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 \\\\ 2 & 4 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\\\ 2 \\\\ 3 \\end{bmatrix}^T = \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Identity Matrix

Identity matrix is a matrix that doesn’t change any vector when multiplied by that vector

\\\[ I \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} x\_0 \\\\ x\_1 \\\\ x\_2 \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} x\_0 \\\\ x\_1 \\\\ x\_2 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

Example of 2 x 2 identity matrix

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\\\ 0 & 1 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

Example of 3 x 3 identity matrix

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\\\ 0 & 1 & 0 \\\\ 0 & 0 & 1 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

### Inverse Matrix

Inverse matrix is a matrix that when multiplied by the original matrix, results in an identity matrix:

\\\[ A \\cdot A^{-1} = I \\\]

Linear Equation
---------------

*   The price of 2 apples and 1 orange is 5 dollar.
*   The price of 3 apples and 4 oranges is 10 dollar.
*   What is the price of 1 apple and 1 orange?

\\\[ 2x + 1y = 5 \\\]

\\\[ 3x + 4y = 10 \\\]

It can modeled as a matrix equation

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 2 & 1 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} x \\\\ y \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 10 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

Let’s multiple both side with the inverse of the matrix

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} 2 & 1 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix}^{-1} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 2 & 1 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} x \\\\ y \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 2 & 1 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix}^{-1} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 10 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

\\\[ I \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} x \\\\ y \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 2 & 1 \\\\ 3 & 4 \\end{bmatrix}^{-1} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 10 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

```
# Find the inverse of a matrix [[2, 1], [3, 4]]

import numpy as np

A = np.array([[2, 1], [3, 4]])
A_inv = np.linalg.inv(A)
print(A_inv)
```


\\\[ I \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} x \\\\ y \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 0.8 & -0.2 \\\\ -0.6 & 0.4 \\end{bmatrix} \\cdot \\begin{bmatrix} 5 \\\\ 10 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

\\\[ \\begin{bmatrix} x \\\\ y \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} 2 \\\\ 1 \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

Features can be represented as vectors and matrices
---------------------------------------------------

In machine learning, we can represent features as vectors. For example, if we have a dataset of 100 people, and each person has 3 features: age, height, and weight, then we can represent each person as a vector of 3 elements.

\\\[ person = \\begin{bmatrix} age \\\\ height \\\\ weight \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

and we can represent the whole dataset as a matrix of 100 rows and 3 columns.

\\\[ people = \\begin{bmatrix} person\_{1}^{T} \\\\ person\_{2}^{T} \\\\ \\vdots \\\\ person\_{100}^{T} \\end{bmatrix} = \\begin{bmatrix} age\_{1} & height\_{1} & weight\_{1} \\\\ age\_{2} & height\_{2} & weight\_{2} \\\\ \\vdots & \\vdots & \\vdots \\\\ age\_{100} & height\_{100} & weight\_{100} \\end{bmatrix} \\\]

Sigma Notation
--------------

Sigma notation is a way to write a sum of many terms. For example, the following is a sum of 5 terms

\\\[ \\sum\_{i=1}^{5} x\_{i} = x\_{1} + x\_{2} + x\_{3} + x\_{4} + x\_{5} \\\]

In a code it’s just a for loop

```
sum = 0
for i in range(1, 6):
    sum += x[i]
```


Product Notation
----------------

Product notation is a way to write a product of many terms. For example, the following is a product of 5 terms

\\\[ \\prod\_{i=1}^{5} x\_{i} = x\_{1} \\times x\_{2} \\times x\_{3} \\times x\_{4} \\times x\_{5} \\\]

In a code it’s just a for loop

```
product = 1
for i in range(1, 6):
    product *= x[i]
```


Back to top